Now that we've seen that we can create a Flexbox, we can set the flex-direction,

in this lesson, I want to dive deeper into probably the biggest topic of Flexbox, which is creating

layout and how you create flexible layout.

What is the automatic or default behavior of Flexbox and what can you change to make it what you want

it to be?

One of the first things to differentiate when we're talking about the different properties to set is,

is this property going to go onto the child, which is the flex item?

So in this case, each of these items that are contained within the flexible container is a child or

is the property going on to the parent?

So the container. And it's important when you're learning Flexbox to really differentiate between these

two things because as we saw earlier, if you set a property that's intended for the child on the parent

selector, it's not going to work.

So the first thing I want to mention is that, and this property is called "order", as you can imagine,

what it sets is the order of your child items.

Normally, this is the color of the rainbow,

and you might remember the acronym ROYGBIV.

Red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet.

Now, funnily enough, when I learned the rainbow, for some reason in my mind, blue and indigo were

always the other way round.

What if you wanted to rearrange these colors of the rainbow?

Well, you would use the order property. By default,

everything has an order of 0, so they're arranged by their order in the HTML.

The red div is above the orange div and this is where the order comes from.

What if you wanted to change that?

Well, you could set the order.

For example, if I selected the green div and I said, well, let's set its order property to 1.

Well, immediately it's going to go right to the end of the Flexbox.

It's going to be the one at the end.

Now you could change that to 1 or you could have it as 5 or 10 or 20, whatever it is,

as long as there's nothing set between that number and any of these other ones which are all defaulting

to 0, then it's just going to look at which one's bigger, right?

10 is bigger than 0.

So 10 is going to go here.

But if this was 9, then obviously 10 is greater than 9.

9 is greater than 0.

But say this was, I don't know, 20, then the 20 is going to get moved over here.

So this is just a really easy way of picking out a specific element that is a Flexbox item and then

setting the order property on it to be whichever it is you want to be to set up the order.

So pretty simple so far.

The next one I want to mention is something called the "flex-wrap" property,

and this is really useful when you run out of space on the horizontal.

Here we've got a row-based Flexbox.

The main axis is from left to right.

New items gets added on here at the right.

But what happens if you have too many items or some of these items are a bit longer?

Well, it's just going to be pushed to the end

and once we run out of space, it's not going to go on to the next line.

This is the default behavior of Flexbox and the flex-wrap property is normally set to nowrap.

Don't ask me why there is no hyphen between no and wrap like a good CSS value should be,

but this is just how it is.

And every single time I look at that property, I always see the words now wrap and I think about Snoop

Dogg rapping to my Flexbox,

but remember, no hyphen,

that's just the default behavior.

Let's say we have a new item and everything is set to nowrap,

then it's just going to continue pushing until you can't collapse any of these items anymore and things

get pushed off the page.

Now you can change this property to wrap instead, but this is not a very responsive layout because

when you shrink the width of your window, then all the items that don't fit are going to be pushed

off the screen and the user won't be able to see it.

If you want this to actually continue on to the next line instead of being invisible, then you could

change this property flex-wrap to wrap instead.

And what this will do is it'll move all the elements that don't have enough space to fit in its full

minimum width onto the top line.

It'll just go to the next line and continue wrapping.

Now remember this flex-wrap is a property on the parent,

so this is set onto the Flexbox container itself and it tells how all of the children should behave,

namely, they should wrap around.

Now, it's a really good idea to play around with some of these properties to see how they work, which

is why I've created a demo website for you at appbrewery.github.io/flex-layout.

So if you go to this website, you'll see we've got our rainbow colors and we've got some selectors

down here.

We just learned about flex-wrap, which can be changed on the container,

and the container is this orange box that you see around the entire border here.

If we turned this container into, say, a flex-wrap: wrap, then you can see what will happen is when

I decrease the width of the screen, all of those child flex items go on to the next line, which is

pretty neat.

Now, there's also something called wrap-reverse, and it means that things are wrapped, but it goes

from the bottom-right corner to the top-left corner instead of the normal version, which is from the

top-left to the bottom-right.

It's sort of like an axis, I guess because we're now in two dimensions when we're wrapping. Have

a play around with that and then once you're done, let's learn about another property.

This one is called "justify-content", and again, it's set on the parent container.

Justify- content basically sets the distribution of our items along the main axis.

This concept of main axis and cross axis is going to come back,

but remember what we learned when we learned about the flex-direction. When we have a row, the main

axis is from left to right and the cross axis is from top to bottom.

So here we have a row based Flexbox.

So that's how it's set up.

And if it was a column based setup, then the main and the cross axis would flip.

In this particular example, if we set the justify-content to flex-start, then this is exactly what

you're going to see,

everything is going to be bunched up to the left.

And on the opposite end of that is flex- end, where everything gets bunched up all to the end.

And this is of course provided that when all the items are expanded to their maximum width, there is

still space left for us to actually justify the content.

If all the items have already taken up all this space, then this is not going to behave like this.

Now the next one is justify-content: center, which is a pretty easy way of centering items in CSS. Compared

to all of the other ways that we can center using traditional CSS,

this is a really, really almost like a godsend of a property.

Very easy to horizontally center,

or if you had the main axis going that way, you could vertically center as well.

And then there's also different properties which allow you to have spacing between the different elements.

And this is something that's used really commonly because when you're creating a website layout, you

kind of want everything to use up the available space and create some gaps between each other to distribute.

Coming back to our demo website on flex layout, then if we take a look at the Justify Content, you

can see we've got Flex Start, Flex End, and I want you to just play around with some of these different

versions.

So Space Between makes sure that the first and last items are stuck to the edges of the container and

then Space Around makes sure that this gap between the left and the right, and the center, add up to the

space between each of the items and then there is Space Evenly, where each of the gaps are equal.

So Flexbox does all of the math and calculations for us in order to achieve the layout that we want,

and if you play around with some of these different versions, then you can see what is it that you

want to achieve and which value you'll need to set for Justify Content.

The next property is called "align-items" and align-items is a little bit different from justify items,

even though some of the values might seem really similar.

This is the position of the item,

so remember, this is a row-based Flexbox,

so here is our main axis and this is what we use justify-content to set the distribution.

Now, in this case, we've got align-items which actually sets the distribution along the cross-axis.

And again, this is a property that's set on our container.

But if you notice here, our container is only taking up the height of our items. For align-items to

really work, we actually need to set the height of the container.

So in this case, we're setting it to 70vh and vh is short for viewport height.

It's basically the height of the window that you're viewing the page.

If this was the window size, then this would be 100vh,

and then if we're setting it to, this is not quite 70, this is more like maybe 60, but this height

is what we're setting when we set the height of our container.

So once our container is a little bit bigger, then we actually have the ability to align our items,

align-items: flex-start

is going to make it all bunch up to the top and then we've got flex-end, which makes everything

bunch up to the bottom.

And similarly to justify content, we've got center and we've also got some other stuff. To demonstrate

align-items,

I want you to change the Flex Wrap back to No Wrap if you've changed this, and then if you see Flex Start,

Flex End, Center, Baseline or Stretch, they all work pretty much as you would expect.

Now, if Wrap was enabled, then you're going to see that the behavior is not going to be quite what

you expect.

And we're going to talk about this a little bit later on when we talk about Align Content.

But for now, keep the Wrap set to No Wrap and then play around with Align Items.

Now, what if you wanted to align everything in the container to the center?

So you use align-items: center, but then you wanted one particular item,

for example this one, to be right at the top,

well, it would need a different align value, right?

In this case, what you can do is all of these properties that we've set over here are on the container,

so on the parent.

But you can reach into the actual item itself and set a property called "align-self".

So this is saying let's be an independent item and let's think for ourselves,

if we set this property to start or end or whichever it is that you want, then it'll actually make

this item separate from the groupthink and do its own thing.

At this point, you might already be a little bit overwhelmed by all of the different options,

you think, "Oh, what if I don't remember all of these?"

"Do I have to memorize everything?"

No.

We are programmers.

We don't memorize anything because we have the internet and the computer at our fingertips.

A good resource I want to point you to is the CSS Flexbox cheat sheet from CSS tricks, and I will link

to it in the course resources for this lesson.

So you can either download the entire poster or you can just look through it in the web page.

Notice how they differentiate between properties for the parent and the properties for the children.

When we look at something that we've talked about just now, for example, flex-wrap, it tells you

all of the different possible options.

So you wouldn't set all three, you would pick one and it tells you what each of these values will do.

Similarly, we've got our justify-content

it shows you what each of them does and also describes what each of them does, and then align-items.

And then what we saw just now was a property for the children, which is the align-self property.

And you can see all of the different possible variations that you could use.

Now, the final property I want to talk about today is the "align-content".

And I said I would come back to this, align-content is similar to align-items, but it only works when

you have the flex-wrap set to wrap.

So when you've made your items wrap and then you want to specify how the content should align, then

that's when you would set align content.

If we applied, align-content to center and we made our Flexbox wrap, then when the width of our window

reduces, everything will bunch up together.

If they need a second line, they'll go on to the second line and then it's going to look at this

align-content value to see how it should be spaced on the screen.

One of the things you might be wondering at this stage, well, what exactly is the difference between

Align Items and Align Content?

Because when everything is Nowrap, when we set Align Content, it doesn't really do anything,

but when we set our items to Wrap and then there's not enough width to have everything on one line,

that's when our Align Content starts working so we can set it to Center, we can set it to Flex End,

to Flex Start. Have a play around with the different properties and take a look at the cheat sheet

here.

Remember, you don't need to memorize anything as long as you know where to go and find help.

So when you want to align something and you don't remember what justify-content does, go over here,

just read the different values and pick the one that you want.

And I'm a really big believer in the sort of just-in-time recap.

So when you're learning stuff like you are now, I'm trying to tell you all the things that are possible

and then when you actually need to apply it for your own projects, you remember the fact that this

is possible and all you need to do is just to refresh yourself on how to do it precisely.

And that way you don't have to memorize any of the things.

Now, in order to complete this lesson, I want you to complete the Flexbox Froggy game.

This is an interactive game and it's a really, really brilliant concept created by Thomas Park where

you can apply your knowledge of everything that you've learned just now in order to move the frog to

the lily pad.

Head over to appbrewery.github.io/flexboxfroggy,

and I want you to go into the settings and I want you to go ahead and select Intermediate.

Now, notice here, there are also different languages if you need that.

You can also change the colorblind mode to on or off.

But I want you to complete the challenges in intermediate mode. So there's no directions,

but remember, you have the cheat sheet and you have what you've learned in this lesson.

And the goal is to write the code that's going to move our frog onto the lily pad.

So, for example, in this case we've got display: flex,

so we know that this is a default row-based Flexbox,

if I want to move my frog from the start to the end, all I have to do is use justify-content and set

it to flex-end.

And once I've done that, you can see my frog is on the lily pad and the next button becomes active.

That's just a demo,

the rest you're going to have to figure out yourself.

If you get stuck, you can go back to the beginner difficulty where they're going to give you a lot

more hints,

but ideally, I want you to stay on intermediate with no directions.

Do as a professional developer would, to read either MDN Docs or in this case probably easier to

just go to the cheat sheet and figure out what will help you and maybe even use the demo page to help

you figure out what it is you need in order to move your frogs.

Go ahead and try and complete all of the different levels and if you get stuck, you can always change

the difficulty and you will probably be able to solve everything much more easily.

Pause the video and give that a go now.

And once you're done, head over to the next lesson where we're going to continue learning about how

sizing works in Flexbox.


Completed
Play
Completed
Play
Completed
Play
Not completed
Play
Not completed
Play
Not completed
Play















































































19:11
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
align-content ---> determines the spaces between the wrap lines.



can be applied when there is a wrap.



cannot be applied at the single line.

19:10
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
understand clearly the diffrence between the align-content and the align items.
12:54
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
align-items controls how flex items are aligned along the cross axis (vertical, in a row-direction container).

flex-start — items aligned to the start of the cross axis (top, in a row).

flex-end — items aligned to the end of the cross axis (bottom, in a row).

center — items centered along the cross axis.

baseline — items aligned so their text baselines line up with each other, regardless of box size.

stretch — items stretch to fill the container's cross-axis size (default, if no fixed height is set on items).

flex-start vs baseline — the key difference:

flex-start aligns the top edge (box) of every item, ignoring what's inside them.

baseline aligns the text baseline (the invisible line text "sits" on) of every item, ignoring box edges.

They look identical only when all items have the same font-size/padding, so their box-tops happen to match their baselines too.

10:46
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
understand the diff between the justify-content & align-items.

justify contents ----> main axis

align-items ---> perpendicular to the main axis



9:59
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
justify-content controls how flex items are spaced along the main axis (horizontal by default, in a row).

flex-start — items packed at the start of the container. Default behavior.

flex-end — items packed at the end of the container.

center — items packed together in the center, equal space on both sides of the whole group.

space-between — first item touches the start, last item touches the end, remaining space split evenly between items. No space at the edges.

space-around — each item gets equal space on both its sides. So gaps between items look double the gap at the edges (since two items' side-spaces combine there).

space-evenly — all gaps (including edges) are exactly equal — start, between each item, and end.

Quick visual (container with 3 boxes):

flex-start:     [A][B][C]____________
flex-end:       ____________[A][B][C]
center:         _____[A][B][C]_____
space-between:  [A]______[B]______[C]
space-around:   __[A]____[B]____[C]__
space-evenly:   ___[A]___[B]___[C]___
7:10
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
flex-wrap: nowrap/wrap; -------> container property -- not the child ones
5:05
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
flex-wrap: nowrap/wrap;

this is similar to the wordwrap in the wordpad.

3:05
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
its important to know the difference where the changes are applicable to : either parent or child



in this case, the property order is applied to the child elements.



lower values comes first-------------higher value comes last

9:35
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
flex basis is intended for the child class of the container
5:01
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
flexing along main axis
4:29
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
flex basis ----> width of elements if main axis is row



flex basis ----> heightof elements if main axis is column

3:19
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
undertstand main axis and the cross axis.



1:25
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
default -----> flex-directoion:row



12:07
9. Flexbox
54. Display: Flex
list-style: none -----> remove bullet points



10:06
9. Flexbox
54. Display: Flex
other display properties such as inline, block, inline-block, none are completely different

think flex in a different perspective,



when apply flex, whatever the elements inside the container with the properties such as block, inline..... will be ignored. rules meera padum.



normal flex go on x axis.



normal flex is a 100 percent block and occupies complete width.



we have one more property called inline-flex. acts like a inline-block.

5:29
9. Flexbox
54. Display: Flex
use float only for floating the images around the text.

not for the layouts !!!!
10:52
8. Advanced CSS
50. How to Create Responsive Websites
All about flex is here !!!

7:52
8. Advanced CSS
50. How to Create Responsive Websites
All about grid is here !!!

2:12
8. Advanced CSS
50. How to Create Responsive Websites
4 ways of doing the responsiveness.

11:34
8. Advanced CSS
49. CSS Float
important concept to learn. but dont use in real time - we have other options such as flexbox, grid & bootstrap. only use when you want to wrap the para p around the image.

14:06
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
understand the map da Raaja

position is beyond the margin.

13:17
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
Fixed positioning - interesting guy:-

seems similar to the position:static until you scroll.



positioned to the browser window not the page. even if you scroll horizontally or vertically, the position will same --- looks like its glued to the monitor screen !!!

12:10
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
z-index --- all bout z axis,

by default all z-index is 0, when all are zero, the element with position:absolute will be moved to the top - thats the behaviour by default.

But if you want to override that make z-index -1.

note: if you are changing this using dev console inspect, refer element.syle --> which is nothing but the inline style element.

7:07
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
Absolue positioning --->

1st priority:

Position relative to nearest positioned ancestor - must have this --> position : relative
And target will have position: absolute and align based on the ancestor.



2nd priority:

if no ancestor have the position: relative, the alignment fall backs to top left corner of the web page. if target has left 50 top 50, the target will move from the top 50 and left 50.

3:14
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
as said, Relative Position ---> position relative to default position. compared to its original static positive, how much it should move or align with the given inputs like left 50 top 100.

0:56
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
static - one after other !!!! defaut behaviour - no need to mention it position: static
19:36
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
combining combiners !!!!
15:08
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
CHAINING !!!!

13:07
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
descendent selector !!!!

9:36
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
parent child selector !!!!

5:25
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
you can group different selectors !!!!

25:09
7. Intermediate CSS
43. The Cascade - Specificity and Inheritance
position of styles in the style.css. heirarchy. last one will apply.

18:19
7. Intermediate CSS
43. The Cascade - Specificity and Inheritance
css cascade

11:41
7. Intermediate CSS
43. The Cascade - Specificity and Inheritance
css rules - overrides

9:45
6. CSS Properties
41. The CSS Box Model - Margin, Padding and Border
understand margin, border and padding.


https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/a-guide-to-flexbox/
https://appbrewery.github.io/flex-layout/
https://appbrewery.github.io/flexboxfroggy/