It's now time for the final project.

And in this project, we're going to be building a flag of Laos using only CSS and HTML.

If you take a look at this image, it looks like an oil painting, right?

But actually, if you look behind the scenes, this is created completely just with HTML and CSS, which

is completely crazy.

If you head over to this URL (https://diana-adrianne.com/purecss-lace/), you'll see the portfolio of Diana Adrian, who is a CSS artist.

And if you right-click on this image and you inspect it, you can see that all aspects of this painting

is all created using CSS, which is completely mind blowing.

For example, if we take a look at something really simple, the hair here, you can see there are like

a million divs in here, each strand having a div.

And then if you look inside each strand, you can see they've got border-radius set, width, height,

different colors, etcetera.

And it's this crazy complex CSS art.

If you're not into oil paintings, then maybe you're into The Simpsons.

These images of The Simpsons were all created using CSS, and if you head over to this URL (https://pattle.github.io/simpsons-in-css/), then you

can actually click on each of these characters and you can see the CSS that was used to create them.

And it's not surprising that it's a ton of CSS to write.

So don't worry, this is not your challenge.

We're not going to be creating something crazy like Krusty the Clown with 875 lines of CSS.

It's just for you to be aware of the power of CSS.

And once we learn the different ways of combining selectors, of the specificity of CSS selectors,

positioning things, different properties, you can in fact eventually create crazy stuff like this,

if you have a ton of time and probably an artistic streak as well. Most of the time when I work with

CSS, my results look like this weird Pikachu where things are not positioned correctly and everything's

just moving in the wrong directions.

So you're not alone.

Most people write CSS code that creates weird pikachus.

The important thing is we understand why we get weird pikachus and why the eyeballs are so far down.

So we're going to consolidate what we learned in this lesson by creating the flag of Laos.

And this is going to test everything you've learned about combining different CSS selectors about CSS

specificity, the CSS cascade, and also about positioning.

And in the end, we will have this beautiful picture of the flag of Laos.

Go ahead and download the starting project files and extract it.

Now here, if you open up the index.html, you will see some very simple HTML that I've already set

up for you.

And if you preview it on the right, you'll see it has pretty much nothing, which is a great starting

point for your project.

The important thing is you don't change any of the HTML, so don't touch the index.html file at all.

It's purposely vague in terms of classes and IDs and nothing is really tagged with anything.

Right?

And this is because we're doing a challenge, right?

You can of course add loads of classes, loads of IDs and make this project super, super easy,

but I want to test you on what you've learned so far.

So that's why the initial index.html has basically nothing for you to be able to target with your selectors.

Instead, you have to be a little bit more crafty.

What we're aiming for is this. The flag doesn't have to be centered or positioned in any sort of particular

way.

This is going to be the top left corner, right here, and then there going to be a sort of rectangle that

occupies part of your website,

but the important thing is that it has these different aspects to it.

It's got a red section here, which is 50% of this blue section here, and then it's got another red

section down here, which is also similar in terms of how much it occupies and how it works is there

is a big red div right here and above it there is this blue div on top.

So that should already help you in terms of how this layout should look.

Now the next thing is we've got a paragraph element that's located at the top and we've got another

paragraph element that has to be inside a white circle.

If you take a look inside the index.html, you'll notice that there are some hints in here, for example,

the width and height of the flag and also the width and height of the circle.

If you want to get hold of the precise colors.

Remember previously we learned about CSS inspection and I've added a URL in here for you to be able

to inspect on

the actual image of the flag of Laos.

This will test you on something you've learned previously as well.

Remember, you can also right-click on the solution without opening the file and show it as a preview.

And you can of course take the URL from VS Code and paste it inside your browser in order to see what

the final outcome should look like

so you can better compare your version versus this version.

You can do this in many, many different ways.

And the main thing I want to know is that you know how to combine selectors, you know, about CSS specificity

and you know how to position things roughly on screen.

Once you're ready, pause the video and complete the project.

All right, let's go through the solution together.

The first thing is to style the outermost div, which has a class of ".flag".

So this is probably going to be the easiest part of this whole project.

We can target that div and set it to be 900px wide and 600px high so that we have a rectangle.

Now next we're going to have to set the background color so we can actually see it so that it's not

white.

In order to get the colors of the flag, remember I said we should inspect on it and then we can go

into the three dots, more tools, CSS overview,

and if we capture the overview, we'll get our hex codes.

So the red, which is our first box, has this hex code, which I'm going to copy and then paste into

here.

And now we have a very large rectangle in our preview.

Now the next step is to add this second rectangle on top of it.

If we take a look at our HTML, you can see we've got a div with class flag as the highest, most div

and then we've got as its children a paragraph element and another div and then we've got finally another

div and a paragraph element.

So this second div enclosed is going to be the one that we're going to turn blue.

Remember I said we can't change any HTML so we can't add any classes or IDs to it.

Instead, we're going to combine some selectors to select this particular div.

So what is an identifying feature of it?

Well, it is the direct descendant, the immediate child of this div class, so we can use the child

combination by saying let's get the class ".flag" and then the angle bracket and then the child div.

And in this div we're going to go ahead and give it a width and a height.

The width, we want it to be 100% of its parent.

So I'm just going to write 100% and it should end up being 900px.

Alternatively, you can write the pixel number.

Next, we're going to give it a height and I'm going to say 300px.

This way it takes up exactly half the height of the big red pot.

Now we just need to give it a background color in order to see it.

And the color is going to be this blue color.

And there we have it.

We have a blue rectangle inside a red rectangle.

Before we get busy positioning things, let's just make sure that we've got everything on screen first.

So I want the circle to show up.

And coming back to our HTML, you can see we've got one div.

This is the red rectangle.

Inside there's another div which is the blue rectangle.

And finally inside that we've got another div which we're going to turn into the circle.

How do we get hold of this one?

Well, we could use the descendant selector because this div is the immediate child of this div, which

is then a child of this div.

So we're saying it's three levels down and we can do that by saying the ".flag" class has a child, which

is a div which has another child, which is a div and this particular div we're going to give it a width

of 200px and a height of 200px and we're going to give it a background color of white.

And we should now see a little square here.

And in order to turn it into a circle, we set the border-radius to 50%.

So now we've got all three shapes on screen and it's time to try and position them so they look a bit

more like this.

Notice that this blue rectangle is not only half the size of the rectangle, but it's also shifted down

by a quarter.

So we want to set its position.

Now, as I mentioned, in order to set the position of an element relative to a parent, what you need

is for the child element,

so in this case, this rectangle that's inside this blue rectangle that's inside the red rectangle, to

have a position type of absolute.

And then if its parent has a position type of relative, then we can now set this blue rectangle relative

to this red rectangle.

So we can say from the top, let's shift it down by 150px, which is a quarter of 900px,

even though we set this red rectangle to have position relative and we didn't move it at all,

by setting it to relative, it enables us to modify the children's position relative to that parent.

And this is why you'll very commonly see this structure, a parent having position relative and a child

having position absolute.

And then we move it relative to the parent using the same strategy,

we can do the same thing for our circle.

Because our circle basically has to be in the middle of the red rectangle if we set the position of

this white circle.

To be positioned relative, then we can set it relative to its parent, which is the blue rectangle.

So in order to move it to the center of the blue rectangle, we have to shift it down so from the top

by 50px, because if we know that this height is 300px,

then half of it is going to be 150.

So then if we know that the radius of the circle is 100px because it's got a total height of 200

and a width of 200, then we know that in order for it to be in the center, it needs to be 50px

from the top.

And by similar calculation, we can work out that it needs to be 350px from the left.

Even though we did all our calculations correctly, you can see this white circle doesn't quite look

like it's right in the middle of this blue rectangle, right?

It's a little bit shifted to the lower part so we can diagnose our issues using pesticide.

In this case, you can see that we've got a div here, but we've also got a box above it and this is

the paragraph element.

And if we go ahead and inspect it inside the Chrome inspector, you can see that paragraph element has

a margin top and margin bottom.

If I go ahead and delete both of those margins,

then you can see our circle shifts bang into the middle.

So it's actually the margin around the paragraph element that's actually pushing the circle down because

it is within the flow of the HTML because by default, all elements are statically placed in the flow

of HTML.

Let's go ahead and implement that in our code.

We can select all the paragraph elements and set their margin to zero.

And you can see immediately our circle is now centered in the screen.

In addition, if we look at the goal image, we want to have the text super large.

You can play around with the font size, but the one that I used is 5rem and this will get you pretty

much the same size that you see here.

In addition, the text is centered both inside the circle and at the top.

So we need to set our text align to center and that gets it pretty much where it needs to be.

Now, the very last thing we need to do is to change the color of this part to white and this part to

black.

One way that we could do it is to simply set the color for all the text to white, and this will turn

everything white and will no longer be able to see this text even though it does exist.

And if we wanted to select that particular paragraph element, we don't have a good way of selecting

it with class or ID because we're not letting you change this HTML.

But you can of course use different combinations to get there.

For example, this paragraph element is a child of a div of another div of another div of a body.

There's actually a cheat code to doing this.

If we open up the inspector and find that paragraph element, we want to select right click on it,

go to copy and then copy selector.

And once you paste it in here, you'll see it's actually the selector that will allow us to target that

exact bit that we wanted to.

I don't recommend blindly copy and pasting things, so this is a little bit of a cheat code, but because

we now understand how this works, we can actually simplify this massively.

We know that what it's saying is find the body, find its child, that's a div, find its child, that's

div and then another child and then three levels deep,

there should be a paragraph tag which needs to be black. Because we understand this, we can vastly simplify

it by getting rid of that body,

or we could change this to the class ".flag", which would do exactly the same.

And we can even swap out these child symbols and keep it as a descendant selector.

So a paragraph element that is a child of this div, a grandchild of another div and a great-grandchild

of something that has this class, we'll select it and make it black.

This is a little bit of a roundabout way of achieving the goal.

You might have done something completely different.

For example, we know that by default everything is black.

So you could have also selected this paragraph element and turn it white instead.

But I just wanted to demo to you a neat feature of Chrome Inspector show you the cheat code after you've

done the exercise and let you know that this is also a possible way that you could try out in the future.

So now if we compare our flag with the solution flag, you can see it's completely identical.

Now, it might not be for you because maybe you've used a different method for positioning.

Maybe you've changed the font size to a different font size, but essentially you should be close to

this layout and hopefully in the process you've managed to use some of the skills that you learned in

this section.

The inspiration for this project comes from a website I came across by Michael Lascarides, and he basically

classified world flags in order of difficulty to draw.

So you can see all the way down here there is Serbia, which is pretty much the most complex flag to

draw because of the shield.

And there are other countries like Croatia or Mexico.

But at the very top there are the simplest flags, for example, Palau or Nigeria or Peru.

So if you want to have a go drawing your own country's flag, hopefully you're not in Serbia.

If you are, then good luck.

But if you're based in Austria or Bangladesh, then this should be quite doable using the skills that

you've learnt with CSS.

Enjoy, and I'll see you on the next section.


