Now, one of the most important things to figure out using Grid is how to size our columns and rows

to conform to our design.

If we start out with a grid-container that has four grid items like this and we go ahead and add some

CSS, so we create some template-rows and template-columns,

and in this case, we're defining the rows and columns by giving them fixed sizes 100px and 200px

rows, 400px and 800px columns.

So when we run this code, this is what we will end up with.

We have 100px high for the first row and 200px high for the second row.

For the first column we said it would be 400px and the second column should be twice as wide at 800px.

The thing you have to realize about the fixed size grids like this one is they are not responsive.

That means that if you go ahead and change the width or the height, it's not going to change at all.

It's going to stay fixed to these sizes that you have specified.

In addition to using pixels, we can also use rem.

So you could use the 1rem and then maybe 2rem.

Now this is still fixed because the rem sizing, as we learned in previous lessons, is relative to

the root of your HTML.

If your body has a certain size or your HTML has a certain size specified and you change that size,

then the rem size will go up and down with it,

but this does not make it responsive to the screen size.

Now another way you might see this being represented is instead of having grid-template-rows and

grid-template-columns is you can combine the two of these into one property, which is just called grid-template.

And you define all of your rows first and then you add a forward slash (/) and then you define your columns.

So if you had a lot of grids to define, if you had a lot of things and you wanted this shorthand,

this is how you would do it.

I don't recommend us to write code like this at this stage because I think it's much better when you're

learning for everything to be more explicit so that when you're reviewing your code and you're trying

to spot problems, it's much easier when you've got the rows defined and your columns defined and you

can see exactly what's going wrong.

This just makes it a little bit more hidden as to what's going on.

But it's really important for you to know this,

if you see it in the wild in other people's code so you know what's going on.

Another way that we can define our grid-template-rows and columns is to use this "auto" keyword.

Now, what this is going to do is it's going to give us a little bit of responsiveness.

Each row is going to try and fit to 100% of the horizontal available space.

If this was your browser window, maybe it would look something like this,

and then you've got your window size like this,

then your grid is automatically going to try and take up 100% of that width.

So now if you go ahead and define your first column as 200px wide.

Like what we have here.

And then you say the next column should be auto,

what this means is the second column is going to be extensible.

It can be as wide or as narrow as it needs in order to take up 100% of the width.

Now, be careful here, because if you do the same thing with the rows, it doesn't behave like what

you might think it does.

It doesn't try to take up 100% of your screen's height.

Instead, what it does is it tries to fit to the content.

If this is set in this case, it's 100px, then that div is 100px,

now, this one, however, is not set in height and it's just given to be auto.

Now, what that's going to do is it's just going to try and fit whatever content is in there.

And in this case, it's this number 3.

So as long as number 3 fits in there perfectly, then it will automatically adjust the height to

fit that.

So just be aware that when you use auto on a row, it's going to fit content.

And when you use auto on a column, then it's going to try and go to 100%.

This is another case where it's quite good to play around with an actual example.

So I've created a demo website for you at appbrewery.github.io/grid-sizing.

And here we've got a menu of different ways of sizing Grid.

You've seen the Fixed Size where the grid is not responsive at all to the size of the screen.

It doesn't matter how wide or how narrow it is.

And then we've got the Auto Size that I showed you just now.

This first column, as we said, has to be 200px wide, but then the second column is set to auto.

So it's shrinking as I'm shrinking my screen and it's expanding as I expand my screen.

But even though the second row is also set to auto, it only is high enough to fit the content and it

doesn't grow and shrink with the size of the screen.

So have a play around with that and come back and we'll talk more about the next one, which is Fractional

Sizing.

Frequently what you might want in your layout is to define the different areas of your layout with ratios

for sizes.

Maybe you would want the first row to be half the size of the second row and maybe you would want your

columns in the same way.

This is where the fractional unit comes in with the "fr", and this unit basically defines the ratios.

If we run this code, this is what we would get.

This first row is half the size of the second row,

and similarly, this first column is half the size of the second column.

You can of course go for any sort of fractions you want.

You could have the first row be 1fr and the second one be 2.5 fr, or you could have the first column

be 3fr and the second one be 5fr, any sort of ratios you want, essentially.

And what it's going to do is it's going to grow and shrink depending on the width available for the

horizontal and also the content size for the vertical.

Again, going back to our demo, if you take a look at the fractional size, you can see that no matter

how much I shrink my screen, the first column is always going to try and stay half the size of the

second column.

And if I go ahead and select this and then Inspect and I add a whole bunch of content to this bit of

HTML.

So let's say instead of 3, I just add a whole bunch of text like this,

then you can see that the first row expands as well, and it's all done just so that we maintain

that fractional ratio, so that this one is always half the size of this one.

So have a play around with this example and then we'll talk about the MinMax Size.

Sometimes you want to define how your Grid is responsive, especially on the horizontal.

One of the functions we can use is called minmax, and here we can define the minimum width and the

maximum width we want our column to be.

This is what it might look like. In this case,

what we're saying is that when we have enough space on the horizontal, we want to give this second

column more space so it can go all the way up to 800px and all the way down to 400px wide.

And this essentially sets a limit because sometimes we have certain types of content.

We don't want it to be too narrow like an image or we don't want it to be too wide because it might

change the scaling.

So this is another way of limiting the size of columns inside your grid.

Right now you can see that this second column here is 800px wide

from edge to edge.

If I go ahead and reduce the size of this,

so if I go ahead and make this window a little bit smaller, you'll see that second column being responsive,

reducing in size until it will refuse.

And that is because it's hit 400px right here.

We're essentially setting a stop at 400px and another at 800px to further define how we want

our website to be responsive.

Remember previously, when we created our chess board, we had to write 1fr, 1fr, 1fr eight times,

and that's a lot of repetition.

And remember, we're programmers, so we're inherently lazy and we want to save ourselves work.

We can do that in grid by using the repeat function.

So we're saying repeat this size this many times.

This is how many times you want to repeat it, and this is the size.

And similarly with our columns, we can do the same thing.

What this is equivalent to is defining the rows as 200px space, 200px,

and for our columns, this code is the same as saying 100px, space 100px,

but we didn't have to write all of that out.

And as you can imagine, if the repeat was eight or 10 or 100, that's going to save you a lot of time.

And as you would expect, this would create exactly the same layout as if you had defined the size of

each column and each row.

It works exactly the same,

it's just time saving.

Now, what if you defined a Grid that is larger than you have items for?

So here you can see in our HTML we have four items, but here we're creating a two by three grid.

So we have two rows and three columns.

If we only have four items, they're fitted into our grid from the top left all the way to the bottom

right.

So that means once we've laid out the first row, it's going to double back and continue along the second

row.

But if we don't have any items for number 5 and number 6, then it's just not going to add them

in there,

and you have this style of layout.

Now what happens if you don't define enough rows and columns?

So in this case, we're defining a 2*2 grid with each item being 200px tall and wide.

Now I've added in a third div, Item Number 5, because that doesn't fit within the templated row and

column, which is only 2*2.

So this is the defined template grid.

Well then anything that gets added afterwards will get an automatic size based on its height and also

any existing column sizes.

So it will try to match the previous columns width, but it will try to fit the height to the height

of the content.

If you want to change this, let's say you have some code that will create more divs in the future,

or maybe you have a game that's going to add more squares, something like that,

you can actually use the grid-auto-rows and grid-auto-columns to define this.

So in this case, I'm saying when we create a new row that doesn't fit within our grid because our grid

actually ends here, then give each of them 300px in height.

And this just allows you to control your styling no matter how many items gets added to the grid.

This is a good time to go back to our demo and click on the Repeat title to see our repeated grid.

As you might imagine, this is a very simple grid which is repeated by having 2 rows which are 200px

each and two columns which are 100px each.

If I go ahead and change this so that I have 3 columns, then you can see we have that layout we

had before where we've got some missing items, but it's only going to lay out as many items as we have

in our HTML.

Similarly, if I change this to only 1 column, then we've got some extra items that are not defined

using our template rows and columns, which is a two-by-one.

So two rows, one column and all these extra ones get an automatic size based on the size of their content.

But we can of course change this by using that property we learned, which is grid-auto-rows,

and if we set this to be say, 300px, then you can see every new automatically added item gets

that particular height.

Have a play around with this and once you're done, I want you to come back and I want to talk more

about how we can use the Chrome Developer Tools to investigate and debug our CSS Grid.

As you can imagine, as we're fiddling around with Flexbox or Grid, it can be quite hard to know exactly

what's happening behind the scenes.

So we're going to learn more about how we can use the Chrome Developer Tools to see exactly what's going

on in our CSS Grid.

As you remember, you can bring up the Chrome Developer Tools either by right-click to go to inspect

or simply to go to the three dots, go to More Tools and then go to Developer Tools.

It will do exactly the same thing.

Basically bring up this panel.

One of the cool things that you'll see is when you have defined a grid,

so this is when you set display grid onto a particular item in your HTML,

in the Chrome Developer Tools, you see this little chip show up and it says "grid",

if you click on it, it will offer you a whole bunch of information, which is really handy.

Now we can change the layout of the overlaid stuff by going into Layout here,

and you can see, for example, if I don't want to have a pink sort of outline, let me change this

to black.

Then you can see it maybe a little bit more clearly.

I can also change whether if we show each of the sizes of the columns and the rows or if I want to extend

the grid lines to see what's happening or if I want to show the line numbers, I can basically show

and hide all of these things.

But normally by default, you'll see the line numbers and you'll see the sizes of the rows and the columns.

Here,

if we look at the first number, you can see that each of the columns are 100px wide,

and if we look at the first number for the second part, each of the rows are 200px high.

So now that we've learned how to size items in our CSS Grid and use the Chrome Developer Tools to inspect

and see exactly what's going on with our sizing, it's time for us to try an exercise.

So I've created a Grid Sizing Exercise in the website and to access it, all you have to do is go back

to the main menu of the grid sizing website and then go to the Test page.

Y ou can see this is the grid that we want you to recreate,

and I've added in the width and height requirements to most of them.

There's just a couple of things to note, which is how this website responds when we resize it.

If I go ahead and reduce the width, you can see that the first column will expand to fill the space

and reduce until a certain point.

Now, when I continue reducing the size, you can see that the third column will also start to reduce

in size,

but the second column stays that particular fixed size always.

The other thing to note is that our final item here is only 50px high, and it's actually even

shorter than how much it should be allocated based on the content.

So this is a grid item that's put in automatically.

So now if you scroll down, you'll see the area that you're working with and right now it's just a div

without any styling.

I want you to go ahead and write your CSS code below.

Only write code that is going to target the grid container, which is this gray box around all of our

grid items.

And I want your code to make this purple section exactly the same as the green section and also responsive

in exactly the same way.

Pause the video.

Have a think about this problem, write your code and then click

"Apply CSS" to see it applied and make sure to see that you've got the right code working.

Pause the video now and give that a go.

All right.

So the first thing we need to do in order to create a grid is of course, set our display to grid,

which is not going to do very much to our code because we need to set the template.

So we're going to use our grid-template-rows.

Now, how should our rows look?

Well, if we look at this first row, it seems to be as high as is required to fit the content.

And similar with the second one, they're exactly the same height, but the third one seems to be double

the size of these two.

So we can use our fractional units with 1fr, 1fr and 2fr to define our rows.

Notice the third one is completely different from any of the other ones.

If we look at the last row, you can see it's only 50px high,

so we could, if we wanted to, to define it right here as a fourth row.

But I'm actually going to leave it because I'm going to use the grid-auto-rows to set the height for

that last one

instead. Let's go ahead and apply our CSS and see what happens.

First row is 1fr.

Second row is 1fr.

Third row is twice as high.

Now, what about all of these other ones?

Well, we need them to become columns.

So let's define our grid-template-columns.

And it's really important that we don't make any typos here because otherwise our code is not going

to work.

If you have any strange errors or anything that's not working, I want you to make sure that you check

the spelling of each of these grid-template-rows.

Remember, there's an S at the end and grid-template-columns.

Make sure that you haven't spelt anything wrong because that happens a lot.

And that's a really simple way to fix your problems.

So how do we want our columns to be laid out?

Well, this first one is going to expand to fill any available space,

and even when it's hit the size of the content, it will continue to reduce until the minimum size.

This is actually done using our auto value.

So this is going to expand to fill any available space and shrink until it can no longer shrink.

The second column is easy.

It's a fixed 400px wide column and the final one has a minimum and maximum value so it can be defined

using our minmax function, minimum 200px and maximum 500px.

Let's create our three columns down here.

auto: 400px and then minmax,

200px and 500px.

Let's apply our CSS and we can see our purple ones are now looking pretty much the same as our green

ones.

And when we try to expand and contract our grid, you can see that it behaves exactly the same way in

terms of responsiveness. For the final, final row it's being put in with the height

that is enough to fit its content.

But remember, we learned about this concept of the grid-auto-row so we could use grid-auto-rows...

So again, we have an S at the end to define how high each new automatically created row that is outside

of the template should be.

So we can change that to 50px.

And when we apply that, you can see that this which is outside our template grid, gets added in with

50px of height.

Hopefully you managed to do this.

If you didn't go back and check to see if you have made any typos, any spelling mistakes,

and with what we've spoken about in the solution, see if you can fix your code.

Once you're ready, head over to the next lesson where we're going to learn more about how to place

items inside a CSS Grid.

So for all of that and more, I'll see you on the next lesson.


Completed
Play
Completed
Play
Not completed
Play
Not completed
Play















































































14:53
10. Grid
61. Grid Sizing
when content gets out of the grid ---> more content - less space



and if you want to control the elements which are out of the grid

use grid-auto-rows: 300px
13:09
10. Grid
61. Grid Sizing
what if : more content : less grid spaces,

row----> accomodate based on the content height

column -----> try to align based on the existing column width

12:18
10. Grid
61. Grid Sizing
understand the repeat keyword:-

grid-template-rows: repeat(2, 200px);

grid-template-columns: repeat(2,100px)

meaning ---> repeat("no of times","values")

[200px 200px]

[100px 100px]



lets say only 4 content --- grid has 6 spaces ----> understand the way how the content is organised---> left to right ----> and next row

8:33
10. Grid
61. Grid Sizing
fr ---> fractions or ratios

column limit ---> up to browser width

row limit ---> based on content ----> if content increased ----> that particular box height increased ---> it will alter the first box height tooo



All situations --> the ratios will be maintained !!!
5:21
10. Grid
61. Grid Sizing
auto on the grid-template-row -----> tries to fit the content ---? expands to accomaodate the content



auto on the grid-template-column -----> extends up to the browser window ---> occupies all the space till the end

2:31
10. Grid
61. Grid Sizing
ccombine grid-template-rows and grid-template-columns in to grid-template,



grid-template: 100px 200px / 400px 800px;

2:15
10. Grid
61. Grid Sizing
if you apply specific width and height to the grid-template-rows and grid-template-columns

that wont be responsive



even if you apply something like 1rem or 2rem - that wont also responsive

6:49
10. Grid
60. Display: Grid
scenario - one dimensional grid vs one dimensional flexbox



grid behaves like a grid -- meaning it acts like a proper row column, the gaps are aligned straight --> both horizonatlly and vertically

flex behaves like a flex ---> dont maintain such gap alignments with repspect to before/after rows/columns --- it just adapt to space availability

2:42
10. Grid
60. Display: Grid
use flex box----> alignment in one dimensional layouts

use grid ----> for 2d layouts

20:26
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
lets say you have three items lined up with the main axis on the row based
first item ---> flex: 1
second item --> flex: 2
third item --> flex:3
flex: 1 ---> grow-1 shrink-1 flex-basis-0
flex:2 --->grow-2 shrink-2 flex-basis-0
flex:3 --->grow-3 shrink-3 flex-basis-0
it is going to respect the RATIOS
100x 200x 300x
growing and shrinking also based on the ratios
1x expand/shrink | 2x expand/shrink | 3x expand/shrink
19:31
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
we can further shrink the most commonly used flex: 1 1 0

flex: 1

19:11
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
short hand way of writing flex:
flex-basis: 0;
flex-grow: 1;
flex-shrink: 1;
flex : 1 1 0;
flex: grow shrink flex-basis;
19:06
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
gs - scenario 4 :- types of flex-basis

flex-basis: auto;

flex-grow: 1;

flex-shrink: 1:



- maximum flexibiity or proiority to the items with more content (one sentence with 10 words)

- less or min flexibiity given the items with less content (one single word)



Instead if you want to give equal width to the all the items, then you can switch to 0

flex-basis: 0

18:05
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
gs - scenario 4 :-

flex-basis: 100px;

flex-grow: 1;

flex-shrink: 1:



in this scenario,

the flexbox is allowed to shrink - up to min content width

the flexbox is allowed to expand - up to available space



flex-basis is completely ignored here ----- DUMMY PIECE BAAVA
17:20
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
gs - scenario 3 :-

flex-basis: 100px;

flex-grow: 0;

flex-shrink: 1:



in this scenario,

the flexbox is allowed to shrink

initial width should be 100px - flex-basis

the range is minimum content wdth --------> 100px

100px is considered as the maximum width/ default width of item



can shrink freely up to min content width

but when you try to expand- it wont expand beyond the 100px.



Note that : this is default behavior of flex box - even if you don't mention anything
you are allowed to shrink
you are not allowed to expand


16:35
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
gs - scenario 2 :-

flex-basis: 100px;

flex-grow: 1;

flex-shrink: 0:



in this scenario,

the flexbox is allowed grow

initial width should be 100px - flex-basis

the range is 100px -------> N px (based on the space availability)



can expand unlimitedly based on the available space - freely

but when you try to shrink - it wont shrink beyond 100px.

15:12
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
gs - scenario 1 :-

flex-basis: 100px;

flex-grow: 0;

flex-shrink: 0:



in this scenario,

the flexbox cannot grow

the flexbox cannot shrink



whatever you do expand or shrink -- the width is constant 100px --- no flexibility

13:33
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
max-width --- tells the potential of item how much it can extend

min-width --- tells the potential of item how much it can shrink

13:28
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
scenario 4:

flex-basis : 400px;

min-width: 300px;



in this case, flex-basis > min-width, so

flex-basis is completely considered

width is applied to defined flex-basis

final width --- 400px

13:23
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
scenario 3:

flex-basis : 200px;

min-width: 300px;



in this case, flex-basis < min-width, so

flex-basis is completely ignored

width is applied to defined min-width

final width --- 300px

14:17
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
selva, you need to unserstand this,
min-width just tells the potential --- indicating the limit
if some attributes such as flex-basis not respecting the min-width meaning if flex-width is smaller than the min-width, min-width comes in to the scene and it will be defined.
if flex-basis respecting the max-width meaning if flex-width is lager than the max-width, min-width DONT comes in to the scene and FLEX-BASIS will be defined as final width.
12:09
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
selva, you need to unserstand this,
max-width just tells the potential --- indicating the limit
if some attributes such as flex-basis not repecting the max-width meaning if flex-width is larger than the max-width, max-width comes in to the scene and it will be defined.
if flex-basis respecting the max-width meaning if flex-width is smaller than the max-width, max-width DONT comes in to the scene and FLEX-BASIS will be defined as final width.
10:59
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
scenario 2:

flex-basis : 50px;

max-width: 200px;



in this case, flex-basis < max-width, so

flex-basis is completely considered

width is applied to defined flex-basis

final width --- 50px

11:15
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
scenario 1:

flex-basis : 200px;

max-width: 100px;



in this case, flex-basis > max-width, so

flex-basis is completely ignored

width is applied to defined max-width

final width --- 100px

9:38
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
when we have both width and the flex-basis,
flex-basis is considered ---- width is completely ignored
when it could not accomaodate flex-basis value---> it falls back to follow minimum content width
9:58
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
if you have flex-basis it will ignore width;

3:58
9. Flexbox
57. Flex Sizing
!!!! IMP !!!!

1. min-width/max-width

2. flex-basis

3. width

4. Content width

19:11
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
align-content ---> determines the spaces between the wrap lines.



can be applied when there is a wrap.



cannot be applied at the single line.

19:10
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
understand clearly the diffrence between the align-content and the align items.
12:54
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
align-items controls how flex items are aligned along the cross axis (vertical, in a row-direction container).

flex-start — items aligned to the start of the cross axis (top, in a row).

flex-end — items aligned to the end of the cross axis (bottom, in a row).

center — items centered along the cross axis.

baseline — items aligned so their text baselines line up with each other, regardless of box size.

stretch — items stretch to fill the container's cross-axis size (default, if no fixed height is set on items).

flex-start vs baseline — the key difference:

flex-start aligns the top edge (box) of every item, ignoring what's inside them.

baseline aligns the text baseline (the invisible line text "sits" on) of every item, ignoring box edges.

They look identical only when all items have the same font-size/padding, so their box-tops happen to match their baselines too.

10:46
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
understand the diff between the justify-content & align-items.

justify contents ----> main axis

align-items ---> perpendicular to the main axis



9:59
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
justify-content controls how flex items are spaced along the main axis (horizontal by default, in a row).

flex-start — items packed at the start of the container. Default behavior.

flex-end — items packed at the end of the container.

center — items packed together in the center, equal space on both sides of the whole group.

space-between — first item touches the start, last item touches the end, remaining space split evenly between items. No space at the edges.

space-around — each item gets equal space on both its sides. So gaps between items look double the gap at the edges (since two items' side-spaces combine there).

space-evenly — all gaps (including edges) are exactly equal — start, between each item, and end.

Quick visual (container with 3 boxes):

flex-start:     [A][B][C]____________
flex-end:       ____________[A][B][C]
center:         _____[A][B][C]_____
space-between:  [A]______[B]______[C]
space-around:   __[A]____[B]____[C]__
space-evenly:   ___[A]___[B]___[C]___
7:10
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
flex-wrap: nowrap/wrap; -------> container property -- not the child ones
5:05
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
flex-wrap: nowrap/wrap;

this is similar to the wordwrap in the wordpad.

3:05
9. Flexbox
56. Flex Layout
its important to know the difference where the changes are applicable to : either parent or child



in this case, the property order is applied to the child elements.



lower values comes first-------------higher value comes last

9:35
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
flex basis is intended for the child class of the container
5:01
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
flexing along main axis
4:29
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
flex basis ----> width of elements if main axis is row



flex basis ----> heightof elements if main axis is column

3:19
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
undertstand main axis and the cross axis.



1:25
9. Flexbox
55. Flex Direction
default -----> flex-directoion:row



12:07
9. Flexbox
54. Display: Flex
list-style: none -----> remove bullet points



10:06
9. Flexbox
54. Display: Flex
other display properties such as inline, block, inline-block, none are completely different

think flex in a different perspective,



when apply flex, whatever the elements inside the container with the properties such as block, inline..... will be ignored. rules meera padum.



normal flex go on x axis.



normal flex is a 100 percent block and occupies complete width.



we have one more property called inline-flex. acts like a inline-block.

5:29
9. Flexbox
54. Display: Flex
use float only for floating the images around the text.

not for the layouts !!!!
10:52
8. Advanced CSS
50. How to Create Responsive Websites
All about flex is here !!!

7:52
8. Advanced CSS
50. How to Create Responsive Websites
All about grid is here !!!

2:12
8. Advanced CSS
50. How to Create Responsive Websites
4 ways of doing the responsiveness.

11:34
8. Advanced CSS
49. CSS Float
important concept to learn. but dont use in real time - we have other options such as flexbox, grid & bootstrap. only use when you want to wrap the para p around the image.

14:06
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
understand the map da Raaja

position is beyond the margin.

13:17
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
Fixed positioning - interesting guy:-

seems similar to the position:static until you scroll.



positioned to the browser window not the page. even if you scroll horizontally or vertically, the position will same --- looks like its glued to the monitor screen !!!

12:10
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
z-index --- all bout z axis,

by default all z-index is 0, when all are zero, the element with position:absolute will be moved to the top - thats the behaviour by default.

But if you want to override that make z-index -1.

note: if you are changing this using dev console inspect, refer element.syle --> which is nothing but the inline style element.

7:07
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
Absolue positioning --->

1st priority:

Position relative to nearest positioned ancestor - must have this --> position : relative
And target will have position: absolute and align based on the ancestor.



2nd priority:

if no ancestor have the position: relative, the alignment fall backs to top left corner of the web page. if target has left 50 top 50, the target will move from the top 50 and left 50.

3:14
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
as said, Relative Position ---> position relative to default position. compared to its original static positive, how much it should move or align with the given inputs like left 50 top 100.

0:56
7. Intermediate CSS
45. CSS Positioning
static - one after other !!!! defaut behaviour - no need to mention it position: static
19:36
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
combining combiners !!!!
15:08
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
CHAINING !!!!

13:07
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
descendent selector !!!!

9:36
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
parent child selector !!!!

5:25
7. Intermediate CSS
44. Combining CSS Selectors
you can group different selectors !!!!

25:09
7. Intermediate CSS
43. The Cascade - Specificity and Inheritance
position of styles in the style.css. heirarchy. last one will apply.

18:19
7. Intermediate CSS
43. The Cascade - Specificity and Inheritance
css cascade

11:41
7. Intermediate CSS
43. The Cascade - Specificity and Inheritance
css rules - overrides

9:45
6. CSS Properties
41. The CSS Box Model - Margin, Padding and Border
understand margin, border and padding.