Hey guys.

In this module we're going to be learning all about CSS Grid, the CSS tool that's going to make it

easier for us to create two dimensional layouts.

After learning about Flexbox, you would probably look at a layout like this and think that you could

have a horizontal row based Flexbox system with multiple divs inside and you can define their widths

and also their alignment and so on and so forth.

Now how about a layout like this?

Can you think of how to create this using Flexbox?

It would be pretty hard, right?

Well, you'll be relieved to hear that it's not just you,

web designers thought creating these kind of complex layouts is pretty difficult, too, which is why

they created Grid.

And Grid is here to make our lives a lot easier.

So if we look at the Swiss website where they've got the weather forecast for Bern, you can see that

it's actually created using grid and we can divide up the layout to see what the grid actually looks

like.

You've got all of these different sections and you can imagine just how hard this would be to make using

just Flexbox or floats.

And on top of that, look at how beautifully responsive this website is.

It shrinks and preserves the grid format, and everything is more or less proportional depending on

how the designer wanted it to look.

At this point, you might be wondering, well, what exactly is the difference between Flexbox and Grid

then?

Do I just pick one of them or is one of them better than the other one?

Well, here's how I tend to think of Flexbox.

I tend to think of it as a tool that helps me align content along a one dimensional line.

So this is a horizontal Flexbox, and it's really easy to use it to place our items and define how we

want them aligned on our page.

Now with Grid, however, on the other hand, I think of it as a tool for laying out content along a

two dimensional grid.

So maybe I would want a navbar over to the right.

Maybe I would want some content over here.

Maybe I'd want a footer down here. Depending on how my design looks, if it is in a 2D,

so there's an X and a Y, then in most cases, you're going to be better off using grid.

Generally, Flexbox is really great for one dimensional alignment and Grid is really good for 2D layouts

where you have almost like a table structure with columns and rows.

But that makes it sound like as if you're going to be choosing between one of these,

it's either going to be Flexbox or Grid and some of you might be wondering, well, why did you teach

us Flexbox anyways?

It seems like grid is far more powerful.

If I can do things in 2D, it's obviously better than 1D, right?

Why did I bother learning Flexbox?

Well, in reality, these tools have different strengths and they have different weaknesses.

Most web developers would use a combination of these two tools alongside other things such as floats

or bootstraps or other frameworks in order to create their design.

In this case, you can see we've got a grid style 2D layout, but within the grid one of these containers

is actually laid out using Flexbox.

This is really, really common.

Even in that example I showed you earlier where I said this is a really beautiful example of grid in

action.

You can see that actually there are components of Flexbox in this.

For example, this is a Flexbox.

It's laid out in a Flexbox column,

and it's a really good way of setting the alignment for each of these items.

So this column-based Flexbox is sitting within this grid.

So sometimes you might have a Flexbox inside a grid and other times you might have a grid inside a Flexbox.

So it really, really just depends on what it is that you want to create,

and knowing how to use different tool sets gives you the flexibility to create things exactly the way

you want it to.

And as my grandad says, the only thing that doesn't weigh you on your travels in life are skills.

So the more skills we have, the better we'll be able to adapt to situations and the easier things will

be. In order for you to better compare Grid versus Flexbox,

because I know right now it seems a little bit abstract, this idea,

I created a website to demo the two of them side by side.

If you head over to appbrewery.github.io/grid-vs-flexbox/

then

you can see this example that I've created for you.

Just because I said grid is for two dimensional layouts and Flexbox is for one dimensional layouts,

it doesn't mean that you can't create a one-dimensional grid, but it does behave a little bit differently.

Let's take a look at this grid we've got, and I want you to watch how it behaves when I try to make

this page smaller.

Notice how grids, natural inclination is to create a grid and everything lines up with each other on

a column and row basis.

So we have a column here and we have a row right here.

And notice how the gaps between all the items pretty much all match up with each other.

They're completely straight along, a very nice grid.

Now, Flexbox behaves very differently.

It's actually very difficult to get the Flexbox items to line up with each other like this because it's

flexible, right?

It tries to actually adapt and squish the content so that everything gets placed on the screen. As I

expand,

this may be occasionally some items will line up with each other kind of like this, but it's not perfect

alignment, right?

Depending on the kind of behavior you want your items to have, do you want them to prioritize spacing

out content and aligning content, or do you want everything to be boxy like a grid?

Have a play around with this website and see what other things you can spot that are different between

Grid and Flexbox.

Now that we've seen how Grid behaves, it's time to show you how to create an actual grid.

Here

I've got a div that contains four paragraph elements.

Now these four paragraph elements are going to be my grid items.

And on the outside of these items I've got a container which is going to act as my grid. In order to

style this HTML so that it looks like this,

all I have to do is target my container using the container class and then set the display to grid.

Now, this should be familiar to you because previously, in order to use Flexbox, we had to set the

display to flex.

In this case, we're using grids,

so we set it to grid.

Next, I have to create some "grid-template-columns" and some "grid-template-rows".

Now, we're going to go into this notation in a lot more detail in the coming lessons, but it's also

pretty easy to understand.

What I'm doing here is I'm saying I want to create columns that have a fractional ratio of 1 to 2.

This side should be 1.

So the first column, if it had a width of 1, then I want the second column to be twice that width.

If this was 100px wide then this would be 200px wide.

But then for my rows, I've said I want it to be 1 to 1, two equal fractions.

And that's exactly what I get.

I get two rows that are pretty much equal in their heights.

And then finally, I've defined a gap of 10px so that this little distance between the columns

and between the rows is 10px.

And that allows my paragraphs to separate from each other without any sort of margin or padding, just

using these few lines of code.

I've managed to create a relatively complex layout for my website.

Let's go ahead and try this and write some code ourselves to see what happens when we set something

to display grid.

Go ahead and download the starting code for this exercise 10.0 Display Grid,

and if you take a look inside index.html, you'll see that there are a whole bunch of divs that

I've created for you.

Now, the goal that we're trying to achieve here is to create a chess board.

And as you can imagine, if you had to do this using Float or Flexbox, it's a little bit painful,

especially if you wanted each of these divs to line up perfectly with each other,

but as we know, this is the strong suit of grid. Using the index.html and what you've learned about

CSS grid,

see if you can style this container to set it to use grid and create this kind of outcome.

There's a couple of things to note.

Each of the squares, white or black, should be 100px by 100px.

So they're squares.

And I've chosen some colors for a more modern, I guess, sort of chess board.

You can just make that white and black if you want to,

it's totally up to you.

But the outcome is to create something like this using our index.html and you should write your code

just below the comments here.

Pause the video and see if you can complete this challenge.

All right.

Hopefully you've given that a go and let's run through the solution together.

Now, the first thing we want to do is to open up our preview so that we can see what's happening as

we're doing things.

And because everything is invisible, because our divs have no size and they have no color, let's fix

that first.

So if I go ahead and target all of the white squares and set them to have a height of 100px and

a width of 100px, then if I go ahead and give them a background color.

So let's use the one that I've got in the example, then they should hopefully show up.

There are huge stack kind of just stacked along here, but we won't worry about that too much right

now.

Let's go ahead and do the same for our black squares to give them a size,

and to give them a background color.

And I'm going to use this color I've defined here.

Now we've got our white and black squares.

Now, unfortunately, they're all along one line at the moment because this is remember the default

layout of HTML flow.

All divs are set as display: block.

So they're going to try and occupy the full width of the screen.

And even though we've defined the width and the height, they're not going to come up and sit next to

each other unless we add some more CSS, which is exactly what I'm going to do right now.

So I'm going to target the container that contains all of these divs and I'm going to set it to display:

grid.

Now, this is not going to do too much just yet because we need to define our template-rows and our

template-columns.

If you look at the goal example, you'll see that a chess board is made up of eight by eight squares

and you can count these if you want.

And in total there are 64 squares and there are 64 divs that I've already included in the starting code.

So we don't have to worry about the HTML,

we just have to set up our grid.

Let's go ahead and set our grid-template-columns so we know we need eight equal-sized columns.

So we have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,

and once we've created all the columns, then you can see even if we didn't create any rows, we've

already got ourselves a bit of a chess board that's created.

Now we're going to explain why Grid is able to automatically infer what we want.

But just in case you did this and it's totally fine, we can add in the grid-template-rows just so that

it's really clear what it is that we want.

Eight equal size columns and eight equal size rows.

One thing you might notice with our solution is if you had extra width, then there's all these gaps

that show up between each of our columns.

Well, the reason for this is because our container is trying to take up the full width of the screen.

What we can do is we can set the width to 800px to fit all of our items.

And then this way we actually get a compact chess board that doesn't split up because it's trying to

be responsive.

Now, the default behavior for a grid container is to try and take up the full width, but only have

as much height as it allows to fit the content so we don't have to change the height.

Now, don't worry too much if you didn't set the width, it doesn't matter because this exercise is

all about you being able to figure out how to use the grid-template-columns and how to set the display

to grid so that we can turn our divs into our chess board.

As long as you've achieved that, then I'm happy that you've passed this challenge.

Now let's head over to the next lesson where we learn more about how to customize our grid.


Completed
Play
Not completed
Play
Not completed
Play
Not completed
Play















































































