Hey, guys.

In this section we're going to be diving deeper into CSS for website layout.

Now, we did a little bit of this when we touched upon CSS positioning in the last section, but we're

going to look at some other aspects of layout and we're going to start with the CSS Display Property.

Previously we've seen that when we create a paragraph element, if we examine the full border of the

element with a tool like Pesticide, then you can see that it actually takes up the entire full width

of the web page.

If we didn't want this to be the case, for example, if we wanted any paragraphs which are short enough

to have the next line wrap up, then we would need to use a different element.

Another type of element is something called a "span", a nd normally you'll see the span element in the

middle of another element.

In this case, I've got a span open tag (&lt;span&gt;), and then I've got the content of it, which is the word, Beautiful,

and then I've got the closing tag of the span (&lt;/span&gt;).

And this span is in between the paragraph element here.

So we've got the "Hello," and then we've got the span and then we've got the "World," and then we've got the

end of the paragraph element.

So that's what the code for this line looks like.

And the unique thing about the span element that's really cool is that it's by default has a different

value for the display property.

There are three common types of display values that we're going to look at.

The span has that value set to something called "inline".

Here's an example where we've got two h2's and because they are set to be display: inline, then they

will literally display, inline with each other without needing the second one to go on to a new line.

By default, most elements have this display set to a value called "block", and a block is exactly what

it sounds like.

It's a full width block.

But as you can see here, we can change that value in order to change the layout of our element.

This is how we would set that CSS value.

We would have the property which is display, which actually has many, many different possible values.

But the three that we're going to examine today is block, inline,

and finally a mixture of the two, which is called inline-block.

Let's take a look at each of these in turn.

As I mentioned, when an element has display set to block, then it's going to take up the entire full

width.

Now, this means that if you have another element, then it's going to go below it and it's not going

to go onto the same line.

Now, however, if the display was inline, then it means that if we had one element here, for example,

a span element, and then we add another element, that's another span, then they're both going to

go into the same line until we can no longer fit any more onto the width of the web page, in which

case they would go to the next line.

Now, one of the important things to remember about elements which are inline in their display is you

can't actually set the size of these elements.

You can't set the width and the height.

The reason for this is because they will default to the size of their content.

If you only had the word hello, then it would only be as wide as it would need to allow that element

to display.

And if you had a much longer sentence then your inline element would stretch to fit that size.

Keeping in mind this, if we go on to the very last type that I want to talk about, which is the

inline-block, what's unique about this, which is a sort of halfway point between the inline and the block,

is the block element allows us to set the height and width,

and the inline aspect of the setting allows us to have elements that go on to the same line.

What that means is if we have two elements which are both inline-block and we have one that say,

200 by 200 and we have another that's maybe 20 by 100,

then in this case, what will happen is because they're both inline-block, then we can set their height

and width.

And because they are inline-block, they can actually go on to the same horizontal line as long as there

is enough space on the width of the web page.

By changing this display property to block-inline or inline-block, we can actually determine the layout

of our website.

And the final one that I want to mention in the same breath is when you set the display property to

"none", then what that's going to do is it's going to make any element on the screen basically disappear.

And sometimes this is useful when you have a button that say, hides an element or when you check-off

an item in the to-do list and you want it to disappear,

this might be the property that you'll need.

So the display property can change many, many different things.

And these are just some of the values that you're going to see set on the display property quite frequently.

In order to better understand this, I've created an example website for you at this address

appbrewery.github.io/css-display

And here I've got three elements a Block Paragraph, an Inline Paragraph and an Inline-Block Paragraph.

So they're all paragraph elements, but you can actually change the height and width of all of these

elements and see what happens to the blocks.

So, for example, we know that our block elements can change in height and width, but no matter how

much you change the width, it's not going to bring the next line up.

We know that our inline elements cannot be changed in terms of height and width because they fit to

the width and height of their content.

And we know that our inline-block element is the one that gives us the powers of both, essentially

allowing us to change the height and width,

but also if the width was large, then it might need to occupy its own line,

but if it's small enough, then it could fit on the same line as another inline element or an

inline-block element.

Have a play around with this on this website to better understand this concept of these three display

values.

And then once you're done, I've got an exercise for you to practice writing the code and setting the

CSS display property.

Go ahead and download the starting file for 8.0 CSS Display, extract it, and open it inside VS Code

and then open up the index.html.

Here

I've got two TODOs for you.

There's two steps to this challenge.

The first challenge is by changing only the display property in the CSS,

so I've got a style tag here with all the CSS and this is what you're going to change.

If we take a look at the preview for the code as it is, you can see we've got three paragraph elements

on screen and at the beginning it looks pretty much the same as the example website we were playing

around with just now.

But the only difference is we have the width and height set to 200px on each of the squares.

What I want you to do is to change only the display property in the CSS code right here in the index.html,

and by doing that, I want you to create a web page where all three of these squares line up horizontally

in the same way as the goal image.

Remember, you're going to have to think about which type of display you're going to need in order to

get all three of these to show up in the same size and horizontally lined up.

So pause the video and give this a go now.

All right.

So the first thing we know is that when we have a display set to inline, it's not going to respect

the height and width.

First thing we have to change is this display value.

So I'm going to change it to an inline-block.

And notice how as soon as I've changed that it is now a 200 by 200 square.

The other thing you notice is that the two inline-blocks, so the green one and the blue one allow this

layout where they line up next to each other,

whereas this red box which is set to block does not, because it wants to occupy the full width of the

page.

So that is the one that we're going to have to change in order to achieve our desired goal.

So let's change this to an inline-block.

And notice

now, if I stretch my page so that there's enough width, then everything will actually line up onto

the same horizontal.

If you had a little bit more narrow then because it's an inline-block, it will move to the next page

so that it actually can show the full width of each element, but on a normal viewing screen,

so if you actually opened this in a website, then you should see them lining up perfectly horizontally.

The next part of this challenge is to change only the display property again, and we're going to make

all three of them line up vertically like this one.

Now this is cut off at the end, but you can imagine if you scroll, they're just three equal size squares

which are all lined up vertically.

And we do that by changing the display property.

Pause the video and see if you can make that happen.

All right.

So the thing that we know about the vertical layout is in order for them to not go on to the same line

horizontally, they can't have anything to do with inline.

In order to achieve that vertical layout.

We need to change everything to have a block display value,

because what this is telling our website is each of these elements wants all of the width to itself.

Don't let it share the width with any other element.

And by doing this we end up with this vertical stacking of our elements and we've achieved two dramatically

different layouts just by understanding the difference between display: block, display: inline, and

display: inline-block.

So how to play around with that if you fancy,

but otherwise head over to the next lesson where we're going to learn about another way of laying out

elements using the float property. For all of that and more, I'll see you there.


